h2. Version 0.5.0

What we are after here is clarity and functionality updates. 

* Update documentation to markdown
* Move from Jeweler to Bundler for gemifying
* Better, cleaner specs
* Finally have working subcommand code

h2. Version 0.4.10

Minor improvement to the sub-command (git-style) module. Still not great.

h2. Version 0.4.9

Gemfile dependencies less aggressive.
Uses MultiJSON; removed strict dependency on JSON

h2. Version 0.4.7

* can now load JSON
* updated specs to run on Windows
* Only accepts things that are to_sym'bolizable as keys
* pings rdoc.info on commit

h2. Version 0.4.6

Unwittingly moved DeepHash's alias_method(:merge,:update) *above* the redefinition of update, and so made merge be quietly broken. Fixed, and many more specs added.

h2. Version 0.4.5

* can now ask for @has_definition?(:my_param)@ or @has_definition?(:my_param, :description)@.
* validate! and define each returns self, so you can chain.

h2. Version 0.4.4 2011-05-13: MANY BREAKING CHANGES

Killed many features for great justice.  Configliere should now be much more predictable and lightweight, and has a much stricter API. Unfortunately, this will break backwards compatibility in some ways.
 
h4. Cleanup of the Configliere::Params "Magic Hash" class

* Configliere no longer modifies any core classes
* All the hash gymnastics have been relocated to DeepHash. 
* DeepHash now converts *all* keys to symbols, and transparently handles deep keys:

<pre>
  Settings['foo.bar'] = 1
  Settings.merge! 'foo.bar' => 1
  Settings[ [:foo, :bar] ] = 1
  # => all give { :foo => { :bar => 1 } }
</pre>

* DeepHash typeconverts objects of type Hash to DeepHash when merged or added.
* DeepHash added several convenience methods -- @slice/slice!@, @compact/compact!@, @extract/extract!@, @reverse_merge/reverse_merge!@, @assert_valid_keys@.

* Configliere::Params @#defaults@, @#resolve!@, @#validate!@ and @#use@ all return self, so you can say

<pre>Settings.defaults(:hi => :mom).use(:commandline).resolve!.validate!</pre>

* Configliere::Params.use now adds middleware only to the *instance* -- you don't get commandline params in your settings object just becaus some other class use'd it.
* Configliere::Params middlewares should supply a block to Configliere::Params.on_use to #extend the object, #use related middlewares, etc.

h4. Cleanup of Configliere::Define.

* The prepositional soup of accessor sugar is gone, replaced by three public methods:
  - @definition_of(param, aspect=nil)@ (without arg, gives the definition hash; with arg, gives that value);
  - @params_with(aspect)@ (hash of param => aspect_definition)
  - has_definition?(param) (has #define been called for that param?)
  see below for what's gone.
* Specs for the magical getter/setter given when you define a param, and for deep key handling.

* Commandline now tracks commandline arguments that haven't been define'd in @unknown_argvs@. It adopts them all the same, but if you don't like what you see there you're free to raise a warning or error.
* Single-character flags now take an argument: @-a=hello@ or @-a hello@

h4. Misc

* :encrypted keys are now stored as base64-encoded
* cleaned up handling of encrypt_pass -- it's no longer publicly readable; set it as a member (Settings[:encrypt_pass]) or through the ENCRYPT_PASS environment variable and it will be adopted in the course of action (and, if a member, deleted). Because of the #use method refactoring, you can have independent settings bundles use encrypted independently.
* Prompt is now its own middleware:

<pre>
  Settings.use :prompt
  pwd = Settings.prompt_for(:password)
</pre>

* bin/configliere shows off the git-style-binaries aspect, and helps you set encrypted params.
* Specs documentation is now quite readable
* Cleaned up the STDERR-capturing part of the specs
* Added spork and watchr support to the specs.

h4. Killing features for great justice:

* No modifications to core classes. Scripts that were secretly depending on Configliere for blank? etc might now break. deep_merge, deep_set and deep_delete have been moved to a DeepHash class, and the Sash class is gone.

* dashed commandline params are accepted but cause a warning -- they do *not* serve as deep keys. By default Configliere happily accepts them. To change that, make a middleware to either convert --foo-bar to --foo.bar, or convert --foo-bar to --foo_bar.

* config_file now just takes a filename: Instead of a magic handle, scope a segment of the file with the :env option:

<pre>Settings.read('./config/foo.yaml', :env => ENV['RACK_ENV'])</pre>

Stripped out a whole raft of oversweet sugar:

* Settings.argv       Settings.rest
* Settings.commands?  Settings.params_with(:command).empty?
* Configliere.new     Configliere::Param.new
* param_or_ask        Settings.prompt_for (with Settings.use(:prompt))
* param_definitions   Not publicly accessible, use definition_of(param)
* described_params    Settings.params_with(:description)
* type_for            Settings.definition_of(param, :type)
* typed_params        Settings.params_with(:type)
* required_params     Settings.params_with(:required)
* define with :no_help and :no_env_help (instead say @:internal@)
  
* Removed the long-deprecated :git_style_binaries synonym for :commands

h2. Version 0.3.4

The jump in minor version number was unintentional.

* handle case wehre file is empty on environment merge
* read returns self, so can chain

h2. Version 0.2.3

* Added a feature to load only production/development/etc subhash from a config file, so:

<pre>
  Settings.read(root_path('config/foo.yaml'), :env => ENV['RACK_ENV'])
</pre>

h2. Version 0.2.1 2011-01-28

* Missing required params include their definition in error message
* finally{} blocks don't supply a parameter any more -- use self instead.

h2. Version 0.1.1 2010-08-17

* Settings.read now does expand_path on the file path

h2. Version 0.1.0 2010-07-24

* Version 0.1 !!!
* Single-letter option flags
* Can give a ':finally' proc (or hand a block to) Settings.define. Example:

<pre>
    Settings.define :key_pair_file,        :description => 'AWS Key pair file', :finally => lambda{ Settings.key_pair_file = File.expand_path(Settings.key_pair_file.to_s) if Settings.key_pair_file }
    Settings.define :key_pair,             :description => "AWS Key pair name. If not specified, it's taken from key_pair_file's basename", :finally => lambda{ Settings.key_pair ||= File.basename(Settings.key_pair_file.to_s, '.pem') if Settings.key_pair_file }
</pre>  

h2. Version 0.0.8 2010-05-02

* Provisional implementation of git-style binaries (foo-ls and foo-chmod and so on)
* Minor fixes

h2. Version 0.0.6 2010-04-05

* configliere/define and configliere/config_file are included by default.
* fixed a bug when ENV['HOME'] is missing (running as root)

h2. Version 0.0.5 2010-01-27

Configliere.use will load all gems by default

h2. Version 0.0.4 2010-01-16

* Cured a variety of issues noted by "@monad":http://github.com/monad -- thanks for the feedback!

h2. Version 0.0.3 2010-01-15

* @Settings.param@ now only works for params that have been @#define@'d :

<pre>
    Settings :no_yuo => 'oops'
    Settings.no_yuo
    #=> NoMethodError: undefined method `no_yuo' for { :no_yuo => "oops" } :Configliere::Param
    Settings.define :happy_param, :default => 'yay'
    Settings.happy_param
    #=> "yay" 
</pre>

* Note that you *must* use symbols as keys (except for dotted notation for deep keys). See the README.
* You must now define environment variables using @Settings.env_vars :param => 'ENV_VAR'@. The order was switched to consistently use param as the key. Also, @environment@ was renamed to @env_var@ to avoid confusion with the "development/test/production" convention from rails and friends.
* die takes an error code as option
* Added example scripts for encrypted and config_block scripts
* The directory path to a config_file will now be created automatically
